# Introduction 
In the summer of 1990, I turned four. The last gift I opened on my birthday, the pièce de résistance if you will, was a Game Boy. From that moment on, I was hooked. I have never stopped playing Game Boy, through its many revisions and its countless games. As I turn 30 and now have the expendable income to collect and play the Game Boy even more than before, I have turned my appreciation into the peak of obsession: cataloguing the essential games released for the system to understand its appeal. I call this project Game Boy Essentials.
Game Boy Essentials is an attempt to discuss the games we should play to fully understand the Game Boy. Good or bad.
There are over a thousand Game Boy & Game Boy Color games. Not all are worth playing. Some aren’t even worth acknowledging. I’m building a list of the games that someone could play to get a complete sense of what the Game Boy is about. Sometimes that means playing *Donkey Kong Land* because Rare could not be bothered to cater their game to the weird screen of the system, sometimes that means playing the games everyone seemed to have played, sometimes that means playing a dreadful game that sold millions, sometimes that means playing a truly forgotten classic.
I think I’m on to something special here since the Game Boy library is criminally overlooked. Very few talk about it in the proper context. Except for Jeremy Parish, with the excellent Game Boy World, a project within Retronauts (give him a visit at gameboy.world or retronauts.com). I hope that with this website I can do the same and escape the tropes of portable consoles discussions. Indeed, traditional Game Boy coverage is often guilty of several things:
- When you see a retrospective on the history of video games, all portable consoles are usually a side note.
- When you look at a list of all the important video games, portable games are for the most part absent. With the notable exception of *Tetris* or *Pokémon*. I would argue there are way more portable games warranting consideration than only those two.
- When people try and group consoles by generations, the uniqueness of portable consoles is thoroughly ignored.

Think how much websites talk about the legacy of the NES and SNES then put it in perspective with this fact: the Game Boy line sold more than the NES and SNES … combined. Do you realize how popular the Game Boy was? Until 2010, the Game Boy & Game Boy Color were together the best-selling video game system of all time, when the DS surpassed them (the DS being eventually surpassed by the PS2). The Game Boy family in total sold 118.69 million systems (Game Boy &amp; Color) &amp; 501.11 million cartridges. In 1995, Nintendo of America said themselves that 46% of Game Boy players were female, which was trouncing the percentages of the NES (29%) and SNES (14%). The Game Boy, for a certain time, was the most important gaming console.
I keep all those numbers in mind when I see people writing that the Game Boy was a lot of people’s introduction to video games. This is diminutive to no end. This seems to imply the Game Boy is something you do before moving on to *real* games on consoles. For so many people, the Game Boy was their introduction, main paragraph and conclusion to video games. People bought the Game Boy in 1990, probably played a lot of *Tetris*, with statistics telling us they bought around four other games and that was a very enjoyable experience for them. They bought it for themselves to play on the go (Gunpei Yokoi famously had the idea for the Game &amp; Watch line when looking at a businessman play with his then-revolutionary pocket calculator on the train), they bought it for children as toys, they bought it because an NES was too expensive, they bought it so they would not always have to hog the TV, they bought it because it looked so damn fun! Nearly half of those people were women, who were clearly not playing other Nintendo consoles. I want to look at the games that are meaningful for the Game Boy, the games that help us understand why the Game Boy was so much popular and attracted a different, larger public.
This book is the first volume of many to come that gathers all the articles I have written so far on my website gameboyessentials.com, the original home of my Game Boy writing. I intend to keep publishing articles on the web and then collecting them in volumes by order of the article’s online publication. I had always intended to have my articles end up in a book, but I find it necessary to publish them online first; this gives me a better outlook on the text and much needed feedback from the Game Boy fan community. I wish to finish this introduction by thanking them for their continued words of encouragement, their support and their insights. They’re the most laid-back, no nonsense group of gaming fans around.