# Resident Evil Gaiden

Resident Evil Gaiden came out of the *let's do something that shouldn't be done* trend that happened at the end of the Game Boy Color's life. It's the trend that brought us such flawed games as *Heroes of Might & Magic I & II*, *Warlocked*, *Alone in the Dark* & *Toy Story Racer*. However, Resident Evil Gaiden itself is not a part of the trend; instead, it is the game that replaced the game that was a part of this movement. You see, a developer by the name of XXX convinced Capcom that it was a good idea to bring their original Playstation game Resident Evil to Game Boy Color. Yeah, right.

Emulators are a dangerous tool; they sometimes tell you the wrong thing about a game. Put in Resident Evil Gaiden in OpenEmu or something on Windows for you lower forms of computer user and you get the impression Resident Evil Gaiden is a failed idea. Put it in your Game Boy Color, shove that thing in your face like you need to do and you get Resident Evil between your palms. A weird Resident Evil, but nonetheless it kind of works.

Resident evil Gaiden does not keep track of which enemies's UF killed. It will instead feature the old time way of if you go down one screen and go back up immediately be two zombies that you just killed we'll will have reappeared. This completely changes your relationship with enemies in the game The PlayStation original will kind of have you be a bullet delivery mechanism where since enemies die once you have children and stay dead you will choose which enemies to kill with your gun and which enemies to kill with your knife to preserve ammo or which enemies to just not bother killing because they are out of your way. Here you will always choose not to kill enemies if you can because they bringing you know benefit. Dead enemies are simply dead until you've left the screen so you have no incentive to kill any enemy. This is completely changes your approach to the game and this is definitely not something that a modern game would change. But since the game was made into thousand and one what looked good on the box and what could easily be achieved was good enough a modern game that is inspired by resident evil would definitely keep the zombies stay dead mechanic at parentheses the place the GameCube resident evil remake famously played with that mechanic to fuck you##Revelations: The Demon Slayer

Jeremy Parish once said the Game Boy Color had weird washed out pastel colors as its palette: he wasn't wrong. To me, those colors evoke a very specific idea. They're not necessarily ugly.

But Revelations the Demon slayer has one ugly color palette.